---
path: "/can-extended-reality-help-save-the-planet"
date: "2021-07-28"
title: "Can extended reality help save the planet?"
tags:
    - augmented-reality
    - virtual-reality
    - climate-change
    - environment
featuredImage: "/can-extended-reality-help-save-the-planet.png"
isFeatured: true
---
In 2018, Stephen Spielberg's adaptation of Ready Player One propelled virtual reality to the forefront of the public eye. It wasn't the first time that pop culture opened our eyes to the possibilities of how new technology can reshape the boundaries of our world. When Pokemon Go came out in 2016, millions flocked to the streets to collect an array of creatures that were only visible through a mobile app. Both are shining examples of how new technologies can improve people's understanding of what is possible.
These technologies are now being adopted for more and more commercial activities, from designing architecture to tourism. Even the [DVLA are exploring use cases](https://blog.govnet.co.uk/technology/dvla-emerging-technology-lab#AR), such as using augmented reality to visualise a new license plate on a vehicle. As the number of new applications being found grows it begs the question - what if we could use this publicity to help save the planet?

## What is extended reality?
Extended reality is an umbrella term that covers three main forms of media. The first of these is augmented reality, which provides an enhanced view of the real world, often in the form of overlays. The next, virtual reality, is a purely digital 3D experience that is segregated from the real world. Finally, mixed reality takes the two ideas and combines them to create 3D experiences that interact with the real world.

## How can extended reality improve sustainability?
### Awareness and education
Public awareness is incredibly important for any social movement. Awareness and public support drive forward any possible actions, particularly when it comes to politics as each politician is conscious of the fact that every action influences their constituent's future votes.

The key to raising this awareness is education, which is an area that extended reality thrives due to the ability to create memorable experiences. At the World Economic Forum in 2017, HTC unveiled "VR for Impact", an initiative aiming to create positive impact through these experiences.

A critically acclaimed example that was showcased was "Tree", a VR experience that immerses viewers in the fate of a rainforest tree that highlights the effects of deforestation. The TIME Immersive app has a similar AR experience highlighting deforestation that is narrated by Jane Goodall.

Experiences highlighting both [air pollution](https://vrscout.com/news/nyt-app-ar-air-pollution/) and [ocean plastic pollution](https://www.plasticpollutioncoalition.org/blog/2020/10/7/stunning-film-sea-plastic-immerses-viewers-in-virtual-experience-of-plastic-pollution) have been unveiled in recent months, signifying that these are not just isolated examples and that the use is growing.

### Politics
The awareness and public support generated by extended reality technologies cascade forward to form political action. Across the technology landscape, politics drives innovation. In his bestselling book "How to Avoid a Climate Disaster", Bill Gates argues that in order to ensure that a new, low carbon technology is adopted quickly enough, political bodies need to play a vital role.

On average, the UK government spends £284 billion annually on goods and services from external suppliers. Each of these procurements has associated criteria that the suppliers must adhere to. Due to the value of these contracts, the government holds incredible power over the innovation adoption lifecycle.

Political influence over the economy can appear in other forms. The creation or modification of laws, legislation and policies all affect the goods and services available to consumers. In November 2020, the UK's Department for Transport announced that the sale of [petrol and diesel vehicles would be banned](https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-takes-historic-step-towards-net-zero-with-end-of-sale-of-new-petrol-and-diesel-cars-by-2030) from 2030. This is an exemplary step that will drastically change the transportation sector and marks a major milestone in the government's ten point plan for a "green industrial revolution".

Governments also have significant control over imported goods. The government may not be able to force another nation to adopt climate friendly goods and services, but they can influence them to do so using measures like import tax.

### Finance
The government is also responsible for a large amount of finance-related influence. The aim of these financial measures is to stimulate research, development, and adoption of new technologies. This is done by providing funding and reducing green premiums (the additional cost associated with choosing a greener technology).

The most obvious example of financial incentives that are currently available are R&D tax credits which support innovation ventures by refunding between 11p and 33p for every £1 spent, regardless of whether they are successful or not.

These examples act as positive reinforcements, cultivating the desired behaviour through financial incentives. On the opposite side, there are also examples of negative reinforcement being used to encourage the adoption of more environmentally friendly technologies.

One example of this is the ability to impose carbon taxes. Carbon taxation is the concept of increasing the price of a product or service based on the amount of carbon it produces. For example, adding a carbon tax to petrol and diesel prices would reduce the green premium linked to the use of electric vehicles.

If we are to meet our goals of preventing a temperature rise of 1.5℃ then we need to put critical foundations in place now. Government organisations play a vital role in building these foundations, as well as in the ongoing effort. Innovative technologies are often more expensive than the incumbents, a factor that slows mass adoption. Normally this would be simply accepted. When it comes to innovations that reduce our emissions however, it is paramount that we remove this hindrance if we are to meet the commitments made at the Paris Agreement.